LLM
===

Overview
--------

This section documents the **LLM-based adaptive bitrate (ABR) framework** used in this repository.
The implementation is based on the `Genet <https://github.com/GenetProject/Genet/tree/main>`_
repository, extended with components for experience-pool generation, state encoding,
parameter-efficient adaptation, and Transformer-based offline reinforcement learning.

The framework is designed to support multiple pretrained language model (PLM) families and
sizes. In the code, the supported model types are:

- ``gpt2``
- ``llama``
- ``llava``
- ``t5-lm``
- ``opt``
- ``mistral``

The supported model size labels are:

- ``xxs``
- ``xs``
- ``small``
- ``base``
- ``large``
- ``xl``
- ``xxl``

Note that the actual parameter count depends on the PLM family. For example, the meaning of
``small`` differs across model types. In this project, although the framework is general,
the primary experiment focus is on **Llama2 7B**, represented in the code as:

.. code-block:: python

   plm_type = "llama"
   plm_size = "small"

What is ABR?
------------

Adaptive bitrate streaming is the process of selecting the bitrate of each upcoming video
chunk according to current and recent network conditions. Video content is divided into
chunks, and each chunk is encoded at several discrete bitrate levels. A higher bitrate
usually provides better visual quality but also requires more bandwidth.

In a typical ABR setting:

- each episode corresponds to playback of one video over one network trace,
- the agent observes throughput history, buffer occupancy, and remaining video content,
- the action is the bitrate selected for the next chunk,
- the objective is to maximize QoE by improving quality while reducing stalls and avoiding
  excessive bitrate switching.

The reward is typically a linear combination of selected bitrate, rebuffering penalty, and
smoothness penalty.

LLM-Based ABR
-------------

This repository explores the use of pretrained language models as ABR policies. Instead of
training a policy entirely from scratch, it:

- collects trajectories from baseline ABR methods,
- stores them in an experience pool,
- encodes ABR states into model-ready representations,
- adapts a pretrained language model using low-rank updates,
- evaluates the adapted model as an ABR decision policy.

Although the framework supports several LLM backbones, the experiments documented here focus
specifically on **Llama2 7B**.

Repository Structure
--------------------

The repository is organized into baseline ABR components and PLM-based components.

``artifacts/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Stores outputs and generated artifacts.

- ``exp_pool/``:
  Experience pool files used for LLM adaptation.
- ``results/``:
  Evaluation results, logs, and generated outputs.

``data/``
~~~~~~~~~

Stores traces, video metadata, and checkpoints.

- ``traces/``:
  Bandwidth trace datasets.
- ``videos/``:
  Video specifications.
- ``ft_plms/``:
  Fine-tuned or adapted PLM checkpoints.
- ``all_models/``:
  Checkpoints for baseline methods.

``baseline_specical/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Contains the code for running baseline ABR approaches. Most of this code is inherited from
the Genet repository and related baseline implementations.

``plm_special/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Contains the code for the LLM-based ABR pipeline.

``plm_special/data/``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``exp_pool.py``:
  Experience pool implementation for storing trajectories.
- ``dataset.py``:
  Dataset wrapper built on top of the experience pool.

``plm_special/models/``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``state_encoder.py``:
  Encodes ABR state features into a form suitable for PLM input.
- ``gpt2.py``, ``llama.py``, ``opt.py``, ``mistral.py``, ``t5.py``:
  Customized PLM backbones for ABR decision making.
- ``low_rank.py``:
  Implements low-rank adaptation modules.
- ``rl_policy.py``:
  Implements the Transformer-based offline RL policy.

``plm_special/utils/``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``plm_utils.py``:
  Utilities for loading and configuring pretrained language models.
- ``utils.py``:
  Helper functions for processing and data handling.

Top-level scripts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- ``trainer.py``:
  Training logic for adapting PLMs to ABR.
- ``evaluate.py``:
  Evaluation pipeline for adapted models.
- ``test.py``:
  Testing utilities for measuring model performance.
- ``generate_exp_pool.py``:
  Generates the experience pool used for adaptation.
- ``run_baseline.py``:
  Entry point for running baseline ABR algorithms.
- ``run_plm.py``:
  Entry point for adapting and testing LLM-based ABR policies.

Core Components
---------------

Experience Pool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The experience pool is the offline dataset used to adapt the PLM. It stores trajectories
collected from ABR environments, usually generated by baseline policies. These trajectories
contain state-action-reward style information and serve as the training signal for the
adapted LLM policy.

State Encoder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ABR state is numerical and structured rather than textual. The state encoder transforms
features such as:

- throughput history,
- buffer size,
- remaining chunks,
- chunk metadata,
- previous actions,

into a representation suitable for the model backbone.

Low-Rank Adaptation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The code uses parameter-efficient fine-tuning through low-rank adaptation. Instead of
updating all parameters of the underlying model, small trainable low-rank modules are added.
This reduces memory usage and training cost while preserving most of the pretrained model.

RL Policy
~~~~~~~~~

The ``rl_policy.py`` module implements the Transformer-based policy used for offline RL-style
decision making. The adapted model receives encoded ABR state and predicts the bitrate action
for the next chunk.

Supported PLM Families and Sizes
--------------------------------

The framework is designed to support multiple PLM backbones:

- GPT-2
- LLaMA
- LLaVA
- T5-LM
- OPT
- Mistral

It also supports multiple size identifiers:

- ``xxs``
- ``xs``
- ``small``
- ``base``
- ``large``
- ``xl``
- ``xxl``

However, the experiments described in this documentation focus on **Llama2 7B only**,
configured as:

.. code-block:: bash

   --plm-type llama --plm-size small

This is the primary setting used for adaptation and evaluation.

Environment Setup
-----------------

Environment for LLM-based ABR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create a Conda environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   conda create -n abr_netllm python=3.8.10
   conda activate abr_netllm

Install dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install torch==2.1.0
   pip install numpy==1.24.4
   pip install munch==4.0.0
   pip install openprompt==1.0.1
   pip install transformers==4.34.1
   pip install peft==0.6.2

Environment for baselines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Baseline methods require TensorFlow 1.x, so they must be run in a separate environment.

.. code-block:: bash

   conda create -n abr_tf python=3.7
   conda activate abr_tf

Install dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install tensorflow-gpu==1.15
   pip install tensorboard==1.15.0
   pip install tensorboard-plugin-wit==1.8.0
   pip install tflearn==0.5.0
   pip install numba==0.53.1
   pip install gym==0.18.0
   pip install stable-baselines[mpi]==2.10.1
   pip install pandas==1.1.5
   pip install tqdm==4.62.2

Usage
-----

Llama2 7B experiment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although the codebase supports multiple PLM families, the main experiment here uses
**Llama2 7B (`small`)**.

Place the downloaded base model in:

.. code-block:: text

   ../downloaded_plms/llama2/small

Adapt the model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To fine-tune or adapt Llama2 7B on the default experience pool:

.. code-block:: bash

   python run_plm.py --adapt \
       --grad-accum-steps 32 \
       --plm-type llama \
       --plm-size small \
       --rank 128 \
       --device cuda:0 \
       --lr 0.0001 \
       --warmup-steps 2000 \
       --num-epochs 80 \
       --eval-per-epoch 2

This uses the default experience pool located at:

.. code-block:: text

   artifacts/exp_pools/exp_pool.pkl

Generate a custom experience pool
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to generate a new experience pool:

.. code-block:: bash

   conda activate abr_tf
   python generate_exp_pool.py \
       --models genet \
       --trace fcc-train \
       --video video1 \
       --trace-num 100 \
       --cuda-id 0

Then pass your generated pool to the PLM pipeline:

.. code-block:: bash

   python run_plm.py --adapt \
       --grad-accum-steps 32 \
       --plm-type llama \
       --plm-size small \
       --rank 128 \
       --device cuda:0 \
       --lr 0.0001 \
       --warmup-steps 2000 \
       --num-epochs 80 \
       --eval-per-epoch 2 \
       --exp-pool-path your_exp_pool_path

Test the adapted model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To test the fine-tuned Llama2 7B model:

.. code-block:: bash

   python run_plm.py --test \
       --plm-type llama \
       --plm-size small \
       --rank 128 \
       --device cuda:0

To test a specific checkpoint:

.. code-block:: bash

   python run_plm.py --test \
       --plm-type llama \
       --plm-size small \
       --rank 128 \
       --device cuda:0 \
       --model-dir your_finetuned_llm_dir

Pretrained adapted checkpoint
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The authors provide a fine-tuned checkpoint for Llama2 7B. After downloading it and storing
it in:

.. code-block:: text

   data/ft_plms/try_llama2_7b

run:

.. code-block:: bash

   python run_plm.py --test \
       --plm-type llama \
       --plm-size small \
       --rank 128 \
       --device cuda:0 \
       --model-dir data/ft_plms/try_llama2_7b

Running Baselines
-----------------

To run the baseline ABR methods:

.. code-block:: bash

   conda activate abr_tf
   python run_baseline.py --model genet --cuda-id 0
   python run_baseline.py --model mpc
   python run_baseline.py --model bba

The repository reuses released checkpoints for these baselines and does not provide baseline
training code.

Experiment Focus
----------------

While the framework is general enough to support several model families and sizes, the
experimental focus in this repository is intentionally narrow:

- model family: ``llama``
- model size: ``small``
- concrete backbone: **Llama2 7B**

This makes the implementation easier to reproduce and keeps comparisons consistent across
training and evaluation.

Why This Matters
----------------

Traditional ABR algorithms rely on heuristics, explicit control logic, or policies trained
specifically for ABR. This project studies whether a pretrained language model can be adapted
into a networking control policy using offline trajectories and lightweight fine-tuning.

The broader value of this approach is that it explores:

- transfer from pretrained foundation models to networking tasks,
- parameter-efficient adaptation for decision making,
- sequence modeling as a unifying view of ABR control.

References
----------

If you use this repository or its LLM-based ABR implementation, cite the following works.

.. code-block:: bibtex

   @inproceedings{wu2024netllm,
         author = {Wu, Duo and Wang, Xianda and Qiao, Yaqi and Wang, Zhi and Jiang, Junchen and Cui, Shuguang and Wang, Fangxin},
         title = {NetLLM: Adapting Large Language Models for Networking},
         year = {2024},
         publisher = {Association for Computing Machinery},
         address = {New York, NY, USA},
         doi = {10.1145/3651890.3672268},
         booktitle = {Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference},
         pages = {661--678},
         numpages = {18},
         location = {Sydney, NSW, Australia},
         series = {ACM SIGCOMM '24}
   }

   @inproceedings{xia2022genet,
     title={Genet: automatic curriculum generation for learning adaptation in networking},
     author={Xia, Zhengxu and Zhou, Yajie and Yan, Francis Y and Jiang, Junchen},
     booktitle={Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference},
     pages={397--413},
     year={2022}
   }